In many cases (maybe most cases, especially for people besides the primary designer and developer), design QA is the first time that anyone from the design team sees a feature in its actual context and with full interactivity. The gulf between that state and any initial prototype, no matter how detailed it was, is huge. And any development process which restricts the form of design feedback at that point to a spot-the-differences picture game is ignoring the nature of making. It ignores the "talking back" of the thing as it's built.

I like that phrase: "the talking back". It means that the structure and its design co-evolve as the thing is made. Goals change, constraints are discovered or dissolved, new and better possibilities reveal themselves. We need to allow for the inevitability of this evolution after initial design approval, and plan for it accordingly, else we set ourselves up for failure.

If we want to keep design QA as simply answering the question, "does this thing look exactly like the mockup said it should look", that's fine, but then we need to have another step before that (but *after* an initial round of development) where the acceptable range of feedback is more broad. Getting feedback in a live development environment is key, and it's why design grooming doesn't fit this requirement. At the time of design grooming, we're still only working with static data at one or two screen sizes to create a limited *suggestion* of the final product. That's not nearly enough to expect that we'll be able to perfectly predict the quality of what will end up getting built.

Christopher Alexander often talks about how a key part of his architectural process involves making full-scale cardboard models of buildings, directly on-site, to get a feeling for context and scale before committing to construction. And what we're talking about here is the digital equivalent of Alexander's cardboard houses. They're fantastically valuable planning tools, but we shouldn't make the mistake of committing dogmatically to the mockup once we start building. And we shouldn't make the mistake of allocating just enough working time to perform a 1-1 conversion from cardboard to wood, because we know the design will continue to unfold throughout the process.

Design prototypes are only what they need to be to convey an idea and point in a general direction. They should not be taken as more than a blueprint. A blueprint is absolutely an indispensable guide for building a house. But if you're in the middle of construction and you realize that by moving a window one foot to the left you can let in a little extra morning sunrise, you might consider moving the window, even if it means deviating from the blueprint, and even if it'll take a little longer. And if your initial project planning was so inflexible that it didn't leave any room for these kinds of build-design-build feedback loops, then it probably wasn't very well planned in the first place.

---

I think most people who advocate for agile development processes have in their head a kind of "lego model", where designers come up with perfectly planned instruction booklets for the product, which are then handed off to developers, and if only they follow the instructions to the letter, they'll arrive at the right solution. In this case, design QA really does become a matter of comparing the final product to the instruction booklet and making sure that there aren't any leftover pieces or things in the wrong place. If only things were that easy.